In the afternoon and sitting in the nice, nice
living room. Cluttered. No, I didn't say that.
Looking out into the backyard, talking to Mrs.
Rutter about her memories of some great years
here. And now we're going to stop and see if the
machine is working. If you want to go back to
Austin, if that's important, I can name a few. All
right, let's begin by, Mrs. Rutter, by you telling
me and this machine and anybody that would listen
to this material later about your growing up.
Where did you grow up and go to high school and so
forth? Oh, that's a long story. I grew up on a ranch
in Menard County after having come from a ranch in
Sutton County. My dad bought that ranch in Menard
County from G. Raleigh White's youngest brother,
Johnny. in 1927, but I had a brother that still had a
senior year in Sonora, and so we didn't move down
there until the following year. And this was, I
said, I've said it's kind of in the middle of
nowhere.
It's in the middle of several small towns. It's 21
from Mason, Texas, 23 from Menard, 26 from
Junction, and 36 from Brady. So that's where I grew
up. I did all the things that kids did at that time.
At the age of 12, I rode a horse to school. 14 miles
round trips, seven there and seven back, to a
little school in London. I said, sounded pretty
good to say you went to school in London for two
years, but when you said you rode a horse to get
there, it didn't sound so good. And then when I was
14, my mother wanted me to go to a little larger
school, which wasn't very large at that, which
would have been Menard, 23 miles. So they bought me
a little Ford Sport Roadster with a rumble seat,
and I thought I was about the cutest thing around.
Green. I drove to school at the age of 14. We didn't
have to have a driver's license then. And that was
in Menard? Mm-hmm, I went to school in Menard. You
graduated from high school there? Mm-hmm. How
many in your senior class? 36, and I was number one.
You were number one of 36? Yeah. And this is what
year? 1932. 1932, and then you go off to college? To
University of Texas at the age of 16. I was so young,
I didn't realize how young I was. But I got along
fine. I served two years on student government,
and I was present at the dormitory I lived in, a few
odds and ends. Had, you know, a lot of nice friends,
but I don't really keep up with them now. It's not
like A&M. Did you know John and Nellie Connolly?
Yes, yes. He was on student government, too. Jake
Pickle was my good buddy. Describe them as college
students. Oh, John and Nellie, that was a glamour
pair of the university. He was so good-looking,
and she was pretty, and... She was the
university's sweetheart. That's what I heard.
And of course, he was. Was he present in the student
body? He was present in the student body, but not
until after I was out. I guess he must have been in
law school. When I got there as a freshman, Alan
Shearer was present in the student body. And he was
a good one. And it's so funny that the politicians
came from that group then. Now there's more Aggies
than UT. But let's see, John Connolly was Jake
Pickles, chairman of his election committee. I
don't know. I'm not thinking straight. When Jake
ran for student body president, John was his
campaign manager, is what I'm trying to say. And
then John was president of the student body the
next year. But Jake, of course, went around with
little Pickles. No, they had real pickles at that
time, real pickles. And he still has these little
plastic pickles he pins on his lapel. And we're
still good friends. We used to pick Jake up when he
was hitchhiking from Big Spring to Austin. He was a
poor boy. Now, when you went to the university,
what was your major and what did you think your
career was going to be? Let's don't talk about
that. It's funny. I had a brother-in-law who had
graduated there two years before I went, and he's
the one that influenced me. And I was a tennis
player. Can't believe that now. But I did, and I
didn't quit playing tennis 1973 suddenly I
couldn't get around over the court so I majored in
physical education although I had never had a
lesson in it in my life but I played tennis that was
it and I my brother-in-law said well and he knew
that I wasn't greatly fond of math or foreign
language you didn't have to have those for that
major you had to have sciences but you didn't have
to so anyway that's what I did and I graduated from
UT
I had been 20 less than a month. And that was too
young to get it. Well, Earl had come down when I was a
senior and told me to apply. They were putting it on
in Brady where he was coaching football at the
time. And I almost didn't get the job because of my
age and I hadn't had any experience because they
were putting this department on. But anyway, I
taught it in Brady. About midsummer, he had gone
down to check me out down there, the
superintendent had, and decided he'd hire me. So
this is 1930? 1936. You mentioned this young man,
Earl. When did you first meet him? Oh, gosh, I was a
freshman at UT. We started dancing together at the
dances, that's all. How did... I knew who he was
because he was in Tarleton when my older brother
was. See, Earl was six years older than I. And... My
brother would bring his annuals home, and Earl was
captain of the football team. Good-looking Lord,
I thought he was something else. And so I didn't
have to be introduced to him. And he knew that I was
my brother's little sister, you know. But I was a
freshman, and we started dancing together. And
then from that, I guess when I was a junior, he
started asking me for dates in summertime and
holidays, things like that. So you, when you were
back home? Yeah, when I was back home. All right,
now he was, by that time he was... Coaching
football in Brady. When he first got out of A&M in
1932, he couldn't find a job. He dug ditches for the
highway department. They were building a road
between Eden and Menard. and he was digging
ditches for 25 cents an hour now his major was what
industrial industrial education yeah but he
didn't he didn't use that either any more than i i
taught one year and at that time uh they wouldn't
hire a married teacher in brady and i guess you know
if you your husband was employed by the school
system and so i taught one year and i I made the grand
sum total of $900, just made $100 a year for nine
months. You didn't teach in the summertime, so you
didn't get any money in the summertime. And if it
hadn't been that my parents paid my first month's
room and board, bought my father clothes, I'd have
been in the hole. I came out with $40, which I spent
before we got married the 12th of June. And he had
exactly $80. We got married on $80 in faith. My, my.
So you all got married at the end of your first year
out of the university. In June the 12th of 1937. And
he was the football coach. Was he the head coach at
Brady High School? At Brady. Or was he the only
football coach? Well, he had one substitute. I
mean, one assistant. I don't know why I said
substitute. But now they have got the biggest
coaching staff, and I bet you there's no more
players. But he made, I think, the grand total of
$135 a month for nine months, just like I got paid
nine months. But, you know, and we didn't think
anything about he worked long hours, I worked long
hours. They had me, I was so young and full of life at
that time, hard to remember, that they made me
sponsor of everything they could think of. I had
never played volleyball, but I got to sponsor the
volleyball club, which met before school, had to
be up there at 7.30 in the morning. And then after
school in the afternoon, I sponsored the pep
squad. I had to work out all the halftime things.
And at night, I was sponsored a senior class, so I
had to direct plays and whatever else they had
going. About how many were in the senior class? In
Brady? Right. You know, I don't remember. It
seemed like a lot. I not only taught in the high
school, but the junior high. And Mr. Rutter, he
coached, but what else? Football, what were his
other duties? When he first signed on there to
coach, they gave him five different subjects to
teach. That was murder. And the couple that he
lived with before his mother moved over there, his
father died in 1935,
And he had started coaching there in 1933, I guess.
But
he had to teach all those courses, and one of them
was chemistry, and he didn't even like chemistry.
Anyway, go ahead. No, I'm just thinking about all
the duties. All right, when you all got married,
what was your housing accommodation that you
first lived in? Oh, Lord. Well, we first... had the
hot side of a duplex. I don't really know. I never
did really know what rent he paid, but it was a
little more than he thought we need to pay. So there
was a doctor who had a big old two-story frame house
and built a brick, nice brick home. And they turned
that into four apartments. So we had the upstairs
apartment on the right, and it had one bedroom. And
then it had a little, I don't know what you'd call
it, but it was over where you drove the car
underneath the portico shade or whatever. And it
was screened. So we rented out the one bedroom for
$12 a month to the old maid librarian. And we slept
on that little screened-in porch. Took the flu and
everything else that way. But that was how tight
money was. Sure. $12. And she shared the bath and
the kitchen. Because the Depression was still.
And I didn't cook. I didn't know how to cook. And
Earl loved to eat. He always did. Then we were there
one more year. And he got the job as coach at
Tarleton. And that suited him just fine because he
put me back in school to learn how to cook. All
right. And so that's the fall of 39? No, not that far
along. Eight. 38. Or was it? Yeah, 38. Yeah. Yeah.
And since I couldn't teach, since they wouldn't
let me teach regular teaching, After that first
year, they made me their chief substitute, which
didn't make any sense. And whatever school was
lacking a teacher, I would go teach it. Now, that's
in Brady? In Brady still. So the last year in Brady,
that's what I did. Among other things, these
non-paying jobs like chairman of the Red Cross
Drive and stuff like that. I don't know. They found
things for me to do, so I wouldn't be idle. Now, I
presume Brady was receptive to a new young lady,
though living there. they were oh they were brady
was always a nice little friend of the town that's
what i would and g raleigh white he had the most
interesting family see there were four men
raleigh was the oldest raleigh charlie willie and
johnny johnny was the one that my dad bought the
ranch from his his headquarter ranch and then they
had two sisters mrs wall and mrs wolf mrs wolf was
the youngest in the family, and she was a lovely
person. And when she heard that Earl and I were
gonna get married, she had me come over. And she
said, now, Margaret, I have a wedding arch, and
I've forgotten the number exactly, 30-something
couples have married under that arch, and I want
you and Earl to get married under it, because
nobody has ever parted ways that got married under
my arch. So my dad came in in the pickup and picked up
the arch, and they had the florist decorate it, and
we married. at the ranch. We had a very small, well,
my mother had just been in Scott & White in Temple
for a long time. And my sister, she had a
miscarriage. She got up the day of our wedding. And
so I pretty well engineered my own wedding. I had
to. And so I thought, I'm not gonna, in fact, my
parents had built the house my senior year in
college. So it was nice and new, so I just decided
I'd get married right there, under Mrs. Wolf's
arch. And then you moved to Tarleton, and y'all are
in Tarleton how long? We're there from 38 to 41,
because, see, 41 is when he was called into
service. He had his commission from A&M when he
graduated in 32. Right, so in those years, in the
30s, after y'all got married, did he go to National
Guard meetings or anything? Reserve, all the
time. Is that right? Yeah, and every summer that we
were, every summer, He had two weeks summer camp.
And where was that normally? Well, it could be at
Fort Hood. It could be at, I can't remember the
place, in Louisiana. Camp, if you said it, I'd say
that's it. Oh, boy. I can't think. On this side of
Louisiana in the swamp. Yeah. It's not a pretty
place, I don't think. So he was normally in the
southwest. Yeah. At summer camp. And that, did
that come early in the summer usually or late?
Yeah, it came, it usually coincided with Jane's
birthday and Father's Day. Jane felt like she was,
it wasn't very funny for her because her dad was
never for her birthday. And her birthday was 16th
of June, so that's about the time. At Tarleton, he
coached football, and what other duties did he
have? Well, he may have taught a course or two. I
don't really remember. I guess he did, but... He
mainly coached, and that's where we were when our
first son was born.
We were there from 38 to 41, at our first home there.
And he was so ready to go into the service that he
sold that home before he even got his orders, and
that scared me to death. As you look back on it now,
do you think that he enjoyed coaching? Oh, yeah. He
had a way of working with young people that was just
really good. And did you enjoy being a coach's
wife? Oh, yeah. The only thing that confused me
about Stephenville was the way they'd dress.
You'd have a bridge party at night and they'd wear a
long dress, and I couldn't get used to that. My, my.
Yeah. Now, he had gone to Tarleton... two years, so
this in a way was going back. Going back home. And am
I correct that people for short called it JTAC,
John Tarleton Agricultural College? That's what
they called the publication, the little paper
that was put out. Was that right? JTAC. And they may
have called the school that, I don't know. You
know, other people like Clyde Wells, he went to
Tarleton. Oh, yes. A lot of people went to
Tarleton. He's called to active duty when? Summer
of 41. Summer of 41. And he went to Fort Sam,
Houston. And you're left with how many children?
Well, we just had the one then. And then Ann was born
in 42. Okay. Courtesy of the Army. She was born at
Fort Sam, Houston. Right. Did you go, where did
you, when he goes to active duty, where did you
live? With him. I followed him around as far as
where he was until he went overseas. And we lived,
oh golly, we were in some pretty bad places. We went
from Fort Sam Houston by way of Fort Benning up to
Camp Atterbury in Indiana, and we were up there a
year. And while we were there, He, in November, was
sent to command and general staff school. And I
thought the weather was too bad to try to take the
kids and come back to Texas. And they made it very
plain, they didn't want any spouses or family to
come with them because they had had to condense
that course down to just a little, like two months
or so from a much longer course. So I stayed there,
but it was kind of a bad winter. My two little ones,
see, Ann was only six weeks old when we got there.
Ann Budd was just two years older than that, and
they both got bronchopneumonia. with him gone, so
it was kind of bad. I've learned in talking to
youngsters today about the World War II era that
they are astonished that there were no pickets
against the war, there were no demonstrators, and
that no one doubted who was going to win the war. And
I do you agree with that with that? Yeah, and like I
say Earl was so Ready to go in and he knew what he's
getting into That he sold our home before he ever
got his orders Right then when he went overseas you
went back where I went back to Brady and And lived.
In a little house next to a neighborhood grocery
store. It was a house that had been bought. See,
Earl in 1935 had bought a drugstore. Everybody
thought that it was his brother's because Earl
bought it so his brother would have a job. He'd
gotten one of those little quickie pharmacy,
whatever you get. Didn't have to go and get a degree
in it at that time. And he didn't have a job. He had a
wife and a little boy. So Earl saw that this came up
for sale. So he did all the arranging and getting
the finance. And what was so funny about that, and
I'm getting off the subject, is C.G. Raleigh
White, who'd always been most kind to Earl, he had
the commercial bank in Brady. He was the bank. And
so Earl went there first to get the loan to put this
drugstore in. But Mr. White wasn't there, and his
loan officer turned Earl down. So he just walked
around the square to the other bank, Brady
National, and they loaned him the money. And do you
know, until he died, he sent every check back to the
Brady National Bank because they had loaned him
money. And anyway, John was to run it. because he
had his little pharmacy thing, and it didn't work
out. We learned a lot from that. All right. When
does he go overseas? He went overseas in 1940. I
could follow 42 or 43 now. Haskell, I'm not
positive on that. It's one or the other, 42 or 43.
Let's see. Where had we been? Hmm.
You know, I should have written all that down, but I
didn't. All right, now, is his first combat
experience D-Day? Yeah. Okay, that's 1944. But
they went, they trained, yeah, sure, but they
trained in England. In England. So it must have
been fall of 1943 that he went over. All right,
between the time he first went overseas and...
Well, did you get to see him at all after that first
trip he first went to Europe until the war was over?
No. I went up. He was at Fort Dix is where they were
before they were sent overseas in New Jersey. And
he called me to come up there. Earl was really good
at giving orders, and he gave them to me, too. And he
called... late Wednesday night, and I didn't even
have a telephone yet. I had just moved into this
little house. And my neighbor came over and got me.
And he called me at her house. And Wednesday night,
he wanted me at Fort Dix by Saturday noon. And I had
to figure out how to get there. I took my first plane
ride, but I got bounced off. You know, you had to
have a priority. to be able to fly and of course I
didn't have one and so anyway I finally got there
but by train instead of plane and I stayed up there
ten days seeing him before he went overseas. Now
while he's in Europe about how often did you write
him and he write you? Oh we wrote a lot and I have all
those letters There's a book over there on the
organ bench now that has two of his letters printed
in it. When they had this exhibit, I guess it
started out in 1990. Ann and I went down to the
luncheon in the LBJ Library. And it was there for
about three or four months. Then they made the
rounds. And see, people from all over the United
States had something in that exhibit. And then
they made the rounds of all the presidential
libraries in the country. Ended up in the National
Archives in 1995, maybe. And then I got them back.
But they asked me what value I'd put on those for
insurance. I said I wouldn't have any idea. So they
put $1,000 each. And I've forgotten what value
they put on the picture of Earl they used. I want to
chat with you about those later, but let's
proceed. So did you write him once a week? Oh, more.
More than that? More than that, yeah. And about how
often did he write? He was good at writing, except
when he was in the middle of the Battle of the Bulge.
See, Earl was in the, of course D-Day was scary
enough. He went in with 225 men, and you know that
story, I'm sure. And end of the first day, this 90
could bear arms. I mean, it was murder, because the
British guide boat had started out taking them to
the wrong point and made them late. Anyway, after
that, it was so spectacular. And it was published
by the War Department in a little book called Small
Unit Actions, where they figured, picked four out
of the war. And that was number one in the book.
anyway then he was also in the Battle of the Bulge oh
yeah see that that was so spectacular what had
happened on D-Day that they gave him a much larger
command regiment in the 28th division infantry
division and they had just come out of the Battle of
the Hurtgen Forest see he was given command of this
regiment on the 8th of December and on the 16th of
December this was 1944 the Germans started their
last counteroffensive, which was the Battle of
the Bulge. And they were right in the thick of that
because they were thinly spread, and I'm sure the
Germans were able to determine that. And so they
came marching through, and Earl's regiment was on
the southern part of this arc. It was the 109th
Regiment. It was on the southern part. Then the
110th was in the center, and it was practically
annihilated. And the 112th was on the top part of
the arc. And so they came marching through. And
Earl's regiment was given credit for blunting the
German attack, because they just pivoted and dug
in and camouflaged. It was snow. And the Germans
came marching up.
It said it was kind of similar to don't fire till you
see the whites of their eyes. And when they got up
close, then they fired on him. He gave the command.
And I did have all kinds of articles about that from
the Philadelphia Inquirer because it was a
Pennsylvania outfit. And they said something
about 2,500 Germans lay bleeding in the snow.
Anyways, pretty much of a battle. All right. With
you back in Brady, When did you first learn that he
had been involved in the invasion? Yes, ma'am.
Okay, I can tell you exactly. When I was up in New
Jersey for that 10 days before he left to go
overseas, we were with this cute couple from, both
were native New Yorkers, Alice and Jerry Wilkin.
Jerry was one of Earl's officers in the Ranger
Battalion. And Alice and I got to be fast friends in
that 10 days, because we'd go into Philadelphia
one night, the four of us, and then New York another
night. We just had a real good time. And she and I
just hit it off. She was younger than I. But she
worked in New York, and she talked about her. In the
summertime, she got a two-week vacation. So I
asked her, why didn't she come to Texas and spend it
with me? So she decided she would. So I had just
picked her up in San Antonio. She flew in down
there. And we'd spent the night at Randolph,
because my college roommate and her husband were
out there. And then we went on over to Austin, and we
were in the Stephen F. Austin Hotel right there on
Congress Avenue. And about 3 in the morning, the
newsboys down below were yelling, extra, extra,
read all about it. I don't know that they even do
that anymore. I don't think so. And so I got up,
threw something on, went down, got a paper. And I
said the thing that was so different from now, we
couldn't find a place to find a radio that wasn't in
TV. And we went up and down Congress Avenue trying
to find a place that we could listen to the radio to
see what was going on. We finally ended up in the
back of Leon's shoe store. And we listened to it for
quite a while. And then we got in the car and drove on
to Brady. That's where I was living at the time.
Now, did you know that his unit was in it? Oh,
without a doubt. We knew that they were in it. And we
did not know that her husband was almost killed
that first day. Earl was wounded twice. He got shot
through the leg. I've got pictures that he sent me a
little snapshot where he's got on shorts. And he
said, if you'll notice, just about six inches
above the left knee, you can still see the scar
where the bullet came out. Well, you can. But then I
had this other picture where he's standing in his
uniform up on top of the cliff. And on that same leg,
same place, there's that blood. So I put the two
together. But anyway, Jerry was almost killed,
her husband. And she didn't find it out until she
got home, got back to New York. Now, when did you, do
you remember how long it was before you got a letter
from him after D-Day? Was it a week or a month or? It
was probably about the time, the first ones in that
book, it just said somewhere in France. It didn't
say where. And actually, the San Angelo paper was
the paper out in that area. And so Alice and my two
little ones and I had gone out to my sister-in-law
because my brother was on Saipan. And she was there
with her two little ones. And we were Always good
friends. Pat died last year. But anyway, she was a
grade ahead of me in high school. And we liked to go
out there. She was a lot of fun. And so a fella in
Menard called me, real nice fella, had a grocery
store there, asked me if I'd seen the paper. And I
said, no. He said, well, your husband's picture's
on the front page that he's been wounded. I said,
oh, golly. So went in, got the paper. She lived 18
miles out. And it didn't say how badly or anything.
Of course, that worried me. And then that same day,
invasion,
he kind of set up his command post in one of the
German bunkers. And I guess it must have been a
shell from one of our ships, and the channel came in
a little close. One of the ranges wrote that it was a
marker shell because it was real yellow.
Everything it hit was yellow. But it came in too
close and hit the side of that bunker. And the men on
either side of Earl were killed. And he was left
standing, but he got shrapnel in his hip and his
arm. I think I may have a picture of that bunker, but
you don't need to see it, I'm sure. You'll take my
word for it, won't you? Sure. Oh, yes. When I first
met Omar Bradley... in 1980 after we got to El Paso.
I wondered if he was in El Paso. Yes, ma'am. He was in
a wheelchair by then. Oh, yeah. Had his stroke. But
he was still very sharp. Yeah. And he looked up at me
and said, you're from A&M. Yes, sir. Did you know
Earl Rutter? Yes, sir. Worked with him. His voice
then broke a little, and he said, in 48 years of
command responsibility, I never gave a more awful
order. than the one I gave to him the morning of
D-Day, because if they hadn't succeeded, we would
have had a massacre on both beaches. Well, in his
book, A Soldier's Story, he says that. No soldier
in my command has ever been wished a more difficult
task than that which befell this 34-year-old. I
know the thing by heart. And it was. It was
something. All right, then, so it goes on through
the Battle of the Bulge. When do you see him after
the war is over? I don't remember it. It's funny, I
don't remember the exact date.